A war has been raging for billions of
years, killing trillions every single day, while we
don't even notice.
The war is fought by the single deadliest
entity on our planet, the bacteriophage, or phage
for short.
A phage is a virus, not quite alive,
not quite dead.
Also, they look as if someone made them
up.
Their head is an icosahedron, a sort of
dice with 20 faces and 30 edges.
It contains the genetic material of the virus
and often sits on a long tail that
has leg-like fibers.
There are more phages on Earth than every
other organism combined, including bacteria.
And they are probably everywhere living things exist.
Billions are on your hands, in your intestines,
and your eyelids right now.
Which might make you nervous, since phages are
responsible for the majority of deaths on Earth.
But you're lucky.
While they do commit genocide for breakfast, they
only kill bacteria.
Up to 40% of all bacteria in
the oceans are killed by them every single
day.
But phages also have major flaws.
Like any other virus, phages need a host
to survive and reproduce.
They're not much more than genetic material in
a hull, and they specialize.
Usually, a phage has chosen one specific bacteria,
and maybe some of its very close relatives.
These are its prey.
Imagine a phage as like a cruise missile
that only hunts and kills members of one
very unlucky family.
When a phage finds its victim, it connects
its tail fibers with receptors and uses a
sort of syringe to puncture the surface.
In a weird motion, the phage squeezes its
tail and injects its genetic information.
Within minutes, the bacteria is taken over.
It's now forced to manufacture all the parts
of new phages.
They only stop when the bacteria is filled
up with brand new phages.
In the final step, they produce endolysin, a
powerful enzyme that punches a hole in the
bacteria.
The pressure is so high that the bacteria
sort of vomits out all of its insides
and dies.
New phages are released and begin the cycle
anew.
In the last few years, bacteriophages have enjoyed
the attention of the second deadliest beings on
Earth, humans.
Recently, we've started looking into injecting millions of
them into our bodies.
Because we're sort of getting desperate, we screwed
up.
In the past, a single cut or a
sip from the wrong puddle could kill you.
Bacteria were our phages, tiny monsters that hunted
us mercilessly.
But then, about 100 years ago, we found
a solution in nature.
By accident, we found fungi that produced a
compound that killed bacteria, antibiotics.
Suddenly, we had a powerful superweapon.
Antibiotics were so effective that we stopped thinking
of bacteria as monsters.
Only the old and weakest among us were
killed by them.
We used antibiotics more and more for less
and less serious causes.
We lost respect for the monsters and the
weapon.
But bacteria are living things that evolve, and
one by one, they started to become immune
against our weapons.
This continued until we had created what are
called superbugs, bacteria immune to almost everything we
have.
This immunity is spreading across the world as
we speak.
By 2050, superbugs could kill more humans a
year than cancer.
The days when a cut or bladder infection
or a cough could kill you or your
loved ones are coming back.
In the US alone, more than 23,000
people die from resistant bacteria each year.
But it turns out that phages, our tiny
killer virus robots, could save us.
We can inject them into our bodies to
help cure infections.
Hold on, how can injecting millions of viruses
into an infection be a good idea?
Phages are very, very specialized killers of bacteria.
So specialized, in fact, that humans are completely
immune to them.
We are too different.
We encounter billions of phages every day and
we just politely ignore each other.
Antibiotics are like carpet bombing, killing everything, even
the good bacteria in our intestines that we
don't want to harm.
Phages are like guided missiles that only attack
what they're supposed to.
Wait a minute, if we use phages to
kill bacteria, won't bacteria develop ways of defending
themselves?
Well, it's more complex than that.
Phages evolve too.
There has been an arms race between them
and bacteria for billions of years and so
far they're doing great.
This makes phages smart weapons that are constantly
getting better at killing.
But even if bacteria were to become immune
against our phage, we still might be able
to win.
It turns out that in order to become
resistant to even just a few species of
phages, bacteria have to give up their resistance
to antibiotics.
We might be able to trap them in
a catch-22.
This has already been successfully tested with a
patient who had no other hope left.
The bacteria Pseudomonas aeruginosa, one of the most
feared bacteria, infected the man's chest cavity.
They are naturally resistant to most antibiotics and
can even survive in alcoholic hand gel.
After years of suffering, a few thousand phages
were directly inserted into his chest cavity together
with antibiotics the bacteria were immune to.
After a few weeks, the infections had completely
disappeared.
Unfortunately, this treatment is still experimental and pharma
companies are still reluctant to invest the necessary
billions in a treatment that has no official
approval yet.
But things are finally changing.
In 2016, the largest phage clinical trial to
date began and phages are getting more and
more attention.
And we better get used to it because
the era in which antibiotics have been our
super weapon is drawing to a close.
It might be a weird concept, but injecting
the deadliest being on planet Earth directly into
our bodies could save millions of lives.
This video was made possible by a grant
from the Bill & Melinda Gates Foundation.
If you'd like to support Kurzgesagt, you can
do so on patreon.com and get fancy
things in return.